# VuFind® Governance Document

Adopted March 8, 2021.

Last updated December 12, 2022.

Developed and drafted by the VuFind® Community Planning Group
(alphabetically: Oliver Goldschmidt, Leila Gonzales, Christopher
Hallberg, Demian Katz, André Lahmann, Craig Murdoch, Mohan Pradhan,
Leander Seige, Hajo Seng); see [**Acknowledgements**](#acknowledgements) below for additional
attributions.

## Overview

The VuFind® open source discovery tool is developed as a meritocratic,
consensus-based community project. The project's mission is to ensure
the long-term technical and financial sustainability of the software,
its documentation, and its development processes. Anyone with an
interest in the project can join the community, contribute to the
project design, and participate in the decision-making process.
Particularly experienced members of the community may also have the
opportunity to serve on the Project Management Committee, the group
responsible for coordinating and managing the project's most critical
processes.

VuFind® is supported by the Open Library Foundation, an unbiased,
independent not-for-profit organization whose mission is to ensure the
availability, accessibility and sustainability of open source and open
access projects for and by libraries.

This document describes how community participation takes place and how
to set about earning merit within the project. It also clarifies the
relationship between VuFind® and the OLF.

## Roles And Responsibilities

### Users

Users are community members who have a need for VuFind®. They are the
most important members of the community and without them the project
would have no purpose. Anyone can be a user; there are no special
requirements.

VuFind® asks its users to participate in the project and community as
much as possible. User contributions enable the project team to ensure
that they are satisfying the needs of those users. Common user
contributions include (but are not limited to):

* evangelising about the project (e.g. a link on a website and word-of-mouth awareness raising)
* informing developers of strengths and weaknesses from a new user perspective
* encouraging integration between VuFind® and other systems (e.g.
    starting conversations between the VuFind® community and
    complementary projects; reporting new APIs that could add useful
    features to the software)
* providing moral support (a 'thank you' goes a long way)
* providing financial support (the software is open source, but the
    project and community need to be sustainable)

Users who continue to engage with the project and its community will
often become more and more involved. Such users may find themselves
becoming contributors, as described below.

### Organizational Users

Organizational users are commercial or non-profit entities which rely
upon VuFind® for some or all of their day-to-day operations.
Organizational users might:

* sell VuFind®-related services (hosting, support, development)
* offer online tools powered by VuFind® (searchable databases,
    catalogs, etc.)
* use VuFind® for internal business processes (e.g. enabling search of
    an intranet)

As long as they comply with the legal terms of the software's license,
organizational users have no specific obligations to the VuFind®
community. However, it is in their best interest to support the
sustainability of the software to ensure that it continues to meet their
needs. As such, organizational users are strongly encouraged to
contribute back to the community by sharing locally-developed code, by
encouraging and/or supporting staff to dedicate time to the project, and
by offering financial support when possible. Some forms of support also
have specific tangible benefits; see below under "Financial Membership"
for more details.

### Contributors

Contributors are community members who contribute in concrete ways to
the project. Anyone can become a contributor, and contributions can take
many forms. There is no expectation of commitment to the project, no
specific skill requirements and no selection process.

In addition to their actions as users, contributors may also find
themselves doing one or more of the following:

* supporting new users (existing users are often the best people to
    support new users)
* reporting bugs
* identifying requirements
* programming (fixing bugs / adding features)
* assisting with project infrastructure
* writing and editing documentation
* developing and running training programs
* offering useful services (hosting, procurement, etc.) to the
    community
* translating text for internationalization

Contributors engage with the project through the [issue
tracker](https://vufind.org/jira), the project's [GitHub
organization](https://github.com/vufind-org), and the [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list, or by writing or editing
[documentation](https://vufind.org/wiki/) and other
project-related content. They submit changes to the project itself via
[pull requests](https://vufind.org/wiki/development:making_pull_requests),
which will be considered for inclusion in the project by existing
committers (see next section). The [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list is the most appropriate place to ask for help when making
that first contribution.

All contributions will be carefully reviewed, and detailed feedback will
be provided by the community in a timely fashion. In most cases, some
revisions will be suggested or required before a contribution can be
merged into the project. As per the project's [code of
conduct](https://github.com/vufind-org/vufind/blob/dev/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md),
feedback should always be provided in a constructive fashion, and
contributors should view this feedback as an opportunity to learn more
about the project and to develop new coding techniques; it is never
intended as a personal criticism or attack.

As contributors gain experience and familiarity with the project, their
profile within, and commitment to, the community will increase.
Contributors who demonstrate a detailed understanding of the project by
consistently submitting stable and impactful contributions may be
nominated to become committers for the project (see below).

### Committers

Committers are community members who have shown that they are committed
to the continued development of the project through ongoing engagement
with the community. Committership allows contributors to more easily
carry on with their project related activities by giving them direct
access to the project's resources. Most importantly, they have the power
not only to submit pull requests, but also to merge them into the
project.

This does not mean that committers are free to do what they want. In
fact, committers have no more authority over the project than
contributors. While committership indicates a valued member of the
community who has demonstrated a healthy respect for the project's aims
and objectives, their work should still be submitted in the form of pull
requests and must still be reviewed by the community before acceptance
in an official release. The key difference between a committer and a
contributor is that a committer can merge work that has been
successfully reviewed, while a contributor must wait for assistance from
a committer. For more details on the process, see the section on
[**Reviewing and Merging Pull Requests**](#reviewing-and-merging-pull-requests) below.

Anyone can become a committer; there are no special requirements, other
than to have shown a willingness and ability to participate in the
project as a team player. Typically, a potential committer will need to
show that they have an understanding of the project, its objectives and
its strategy. They will also have provided valuable contributions to the
project over a period of time.

New committers can be nominated by any existing committer. Once they
have been nominated, there will be a vote by the project management
committee (PMC; see below). Committer voting is one of the few
activities that takes place through private PMC communication. This is
to allow PMC members to freely express their opinions about a nominee
without causing embarrassment. Once the vote has been held, the
aggregated voting results are published on the [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list. The nominee is entitled to request an explanation of any
'no' votes against them, regardless of the outcome of the vote. This
explanation will be provided by the PMC Community Manager (see below)
and will be anonymous and constructive in nature.

Nominees may decline their appointment as a committer. However, this is
unusual, as the project does not expect any specific time or resource
commitment from its community members. The intention behind the role of
committer is to allow people to contribute to the project more easily,
not to tie them in to the project in any formal way.

It is important to recognise that committership is a privilege, not a
right. That privilege must be earned and once earned it can be removed
by the PMC (see next section) in extreme circumstances. However, under
normal circumstances committership exists for as long as the committer
wishes to continue engaging with the project.

A committer who shows an above-average level of contribution to the
project, particularly with respect to its strategic direction and
long-term health, may be nominated to become a member of the PMC. This
role does not change their status as a committer, but it adds some
additional responsibilities as described below.

### VuFind® Project Management Committee

The VuFind® Project Management Committee (PMC) consists of those
individuals identified on the [VuFind®
website](https://vufind.org/wiki/community:roles_and_responsibilities#project_management_committee). The PMC has additional
responsibilities over and above those of a committer. These
responsibilities ensure the smooth running of the project. PMC members
are expected to review code contributions, participate in strategic
planning, approve changes to the governance model/document, and manage
the copyrights within the project outputs. The PMC also votes to fill
key roles related to VuFind®'s membership in the Open Library Foundation,
including a Treasurer to manage the project's finances (see below).

In order to participate in voting, members of the PMC must agree to comply
with the project's [Conflict of Interest Policy](https://vufind.org/docs/COI_Policy.pdf)
and must send a signed acknowledgment form to the Community Manager to be
filed with the Open Library Foundation. Non-voting guests may participate
in PMC meetings at the invitation of the PMC.

Members of the PMC do not have significant authority over other members
of the community, although it is the PMC that votes on new committers
and responds to code of conduct violations. It also helps to make
decisions when community consensus cannot be reached. In addition, the
PMC has access to the project's private communication channels. Private
communication is used for sensitive issues, such as votes for new
committers (see above), discussion of misconduct reports, and legal or
financial matters that cannot be discussed in public. It is never used
for project management or planning.

PMC membership is for a two year term with no limit on the number of
terms a member may serve. Membership of the PMC is by invitation from
the existing PMC members. In order to recognize an exceptional
committer, the PMC may vote to invite them onto the PMC. In order to
fill a vacancy, the PMC can also invite the community to self-nominate,
and then vote to select members from the applications received. A PMC
member's term begins on the date they are voted in by the other PMC
members and ends (or must be renewed) exactly two years after that date.
Because active participation and communication are critical to serving
on the PMC, members may be removed after 90 days of unexcused
inactivity. A member removed due to inactivity may be reinstated later
if circumstances change.

In the case of gross misconduct, such as repeated code of conduct
violations or serious breach of reviewing/merging protocol, a PMC member
or committer can be removed from their role. Such a removal requires a
two-thirds majority vote of the PMC. The PMC may also vote on whether to
make the ban temporary or permanent, as appropriate to the
circumstances.

Ideally, the PMC should be composed of an odd number of members (to
prevent deadlock in voting). To ensure diversity of opinion while
keeping discussion focused and efficient, the group should contain
between five and nine members. When nominating and voting for new PMC
members, existing members should give strong priority to representing
the project's geographical and organizational diversity. When possible,
members should come from different parts of the world and from different
types of institutions, in order to ensure that decision-making is not
biased toward any particular subset of the community.

#### PMC Community Manager

The Community Manager is a single individual, voted for by the PMC
members. Once someone has been appointed Community Manager, they remain
in that role until they choose to retire, or the PMC casts a two-thirds
majority vote to remove them.

The Community Manager has no additional authority over other members of
the PMC: the role is one of coordinator and facilitator. The Community
Manager is also expected to ensure that all governance processes are
adhered to, and has the casting vote when the PMC fails to reach
consensus. The Community Manager serves as the Primary Manager with
regards to the Open Library Foundation (see below).

#### Open Library Foundation Roles

In addition to the roles described above, which are used internally by
the VuFind® community, the Open Library Foundation requires all member
communities to designate individuals for three OLF-specific roles:

* **Primary Manager** - This is the primary point of contact within
     the VuFind® Project for OLF communications and collaboration. This
     person executes contracts/agreements with the OLF on behalf of the
     project.

* **Treasurer** - this person manages or is deeply familiar with the
     finances of the project. This person is designated to approve
     expenditures of the project, can wield a credit card and bank
     account ownership on behalf of the project, and is available to
     coordinate with the OLF Treasurer on reporting and annual
     bookkeeping.

* **Secretary** - this person manages the minutes of the project
     including any resolutions required to document business with the
     OLF. This person also manages and maintains all contracts brokered
     and executed through the VuFind® SMLLC on behalf of the project,
     and supports the activities of the Primary Manager and the
     Treasurer.

For simplicity, VuFind®'s PMC Community Manager will always serve as the
OLF Primary Manager.

The OLF Secretary and Treasurer will be nominated and confirmed by the
PMC.

The Treasurer is not required to be a member of the PMC, but the
Secretary should be a member of PMC.

The individual serving as the OLF Secretary may also be called upon to
serve as an interim VuFind® PMC Community Manager if the current
Community Manager is temporarily unavailable, or until such time as
voting is completed to replace a retiring Community Manager.

### Other Project Roles

While this document details some of the largest and most critical roles
and responsibilities within the VuFind® project, there are many smaller
jobs that support the project's success, ranging from newsletter editing
to release management. Because these roles may grow and evolve over
time, it is impractical to try to capture all of them in this document;
they are instead listed on the [Community Roles and
Responsibilities](https://vufind.org/wiki/community:roles_and_responsibilities#other_specific_roles)
web page. The assignment of individuals to these roles is accomplished
by vote of the PMC.

## Support

All participants in the community are encouraged to provide support for
new users within the project management infrastructure. This support is
provided as a way of growing the community. Those seeking support should
recognise that all support activity within the project is voluntary and
is therefore provided as and when time allows. A user requiring
guaranteed response times or results should therefore seek to purchase a
support contract from an external support provider. However, for those
willing to engage with the project on its own terms, and willing to help
support other users, the community support channels are ideal.

For more information on the communication channels available for
community-based support and external organizations providing commercial
support, see the project's [Support web
page](https://vufind.org/vufind/support.html).

## Financial Membership

Financial membership enables the project to be financially sustainable
and, in time, financially independent. Financial membership is available
at various levels, with certain benefits applying to each level.
Membership levels and benefits are set by the PMC, and current options
are summarized on the [Membership Levels and
Benefits](https://vufind.org/wiki/community:membership_levels_and_benefits)
web page. Lack of financial membership does not preclude any member of
the community from becoming a member of the PMC, or contributing in any
other way to the project. Additionally, membership benefits will never
include special privileges relating to project roles or decision-making,
as such benefits would be counter to the meritocratic model. Financial
support is essential and greatly appreciated, but it is not a substitute
for meaningful engagement with the work of the project.

## Decision Making Process

Decisions about the future of the project are made through discussion
with all members of the community, from the newest user to the most
experienced PMC member. All non-sensitive project management discussion
takes place on the [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list. Occasionally, sensitive discussion occurs in private, as
discussed above under [**VuFind® Project Management Committee**](#vufind-project-management-committee).

In order to ensure that the project is not bogged down by endless
discussion and continual voting, the project operates a policy of lazy
consensus. This allows the majority of decisions to be made without
resorting to a formal vote.

### Lazy consensus

Decision making typically involves the following steps:

* Proposal
* Discussion
* Vote (if consensus is not reached through discussion)
* Decision

Any community member can make a proposal for consideration by the
community. In order to initiate a discussion about a new idea, they
should create a ticket in the [issue
tracker](https://vufind.org/jira) or submit a [pull
request](https://github.com/vufind-org/vufind/pulls). For complex
or potentially controversial submissions, sending an email to the
[VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list is also strongly encouraged, to ensure that the submissions
receive an appropriate amount of attention. This will prompt a review
and, if necessary, a discussion of the idea. The goal of this review and
discussion is to gain approval for the contribution. Since most people
in the project community have a shared vision, there is often little
need for discussion in order to reach consensus.

In general, as long as nobody explicitly opposes a proposal or patch, it
is recognised as having the support of the community. This is called
lazy consensus - that is, those who have not stated their opinion
explicitly have implicitly agreed to the implementation of the proposal.

Lazy consensus is a very important concept within the project. It is
this process that allows a large group of people to efficiently reach
consensus, as someone with no objections to a proposal need not spend
time stating their position, and others need not spend time reading such
mails.

For lazy consensus to be effective, it is necessary to allow at least 72
hours before assuming that there are no objections to the proposal. This
requirement ensures that everyone is given enough time to read, digest
and respond to the proposal. This time period is chosen so as to be as
inclusive as possible of all participants, regardless of their location
and time commitments.

In cases where lazy consensus cannot be reached, discussion should take
place within the comments of the issue ticket or pull request
representing the proposal, in order to keep the conversation associated
with the submission. If a real-time discussion is desirable, a request
can be sent to the [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
list to have the item added to the agenda for the next scheduled
[Community Call](https://vufind.org/wiki/community_call). If 72
hours pass with no dissenting comments left unresolved in the
conversation, and with no pending Community Call discussion scheduled,
consensus can be considered to have been reached. Otherwise, voting may
be necessary to reach a final decision.

### Voting

Not all decisions can be made using lazy consensus. Technical
conversations that cannot be fully resolved through conversation may
need a vote for resolution, and issues such as those affecting the
strategic direction or legal standing of the project must gain explicit
approval in the form of a vote. Every member of the community is
encouraged to express their opinions in all discussion and all votes.
However, only a subset of the community have binding votes for the
purposes of decision making. The voting mechanism and participants vary
depending on the type of vote.

#### Technical Votes

Technical votes are required when consensus cannot be reached around a
proposal or submission. The question being voted on should be phrased
clearly and unambiguously, such as "Should we merge pull request X?" or
"Should we make architectural change / technical decision Y?" Voting
should be announced through an email to [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech).
Feedback is welcomed from the entire community, but only committers have
binding votes. Votes are made through public comment on the issue or PR
under discussion. If, after one week from the start of voting, a simple
majority has been reached among eligible voters, the issue is considered
resolved. In the case of a tie, a simple majority among PMC members can
serve as a tie-breaker. In the case of a further tie, the PMC Community
Manager can make the final decision.

#### Project Management Votes

As noted above, there are a number of circumstances that may require a
vote of the PMC: promoting community members, resolving code of conduct
issues, adjusting policies, and making high-level decisions about legal
and financial matters. Any member of the PMC may raise such an issue for
voting via the group's private communication channel, and group members
will have one week to respond. At the end of the voting period, a
two-thirds majority must be reached to take the proposed action or make
the proposed change. The voting period may be resolved early if all PMC
members have participated.

Because PMC voting takes place in private, it is important for project
transparency that voting outcomes are shared with the larger community.
Votes involving interpersonal conflict resolution \-- for example, code
of conduct violations \-- will not be shared to protect the privacy of
the parties involved. All other decisions should be shared to the
[VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list by the PMC Community Manager or Secretary. Additionally,
all decisions impacting project direction or policy should be summarized
in the next published monthly newsletter.

### Reviewing and Merging Pull Requests

Much of VuFind®'s activity is accomplished through GitHub pull requests.
This section provides best practices to ensure a smooth-running process
resulting in high-quality, stable code.

#### Types of Contributions

Contributions typically fall into one of the following categories:

* **Trivial** - a change that does not impact the functionality of the
     code in any way; for example, a correction of a typographical
     error in a configuration file or comment.

* **Bug Fix** - a correction to broken functionality.

* **New Feature/Improvement** - added or improved functionality that
     does not change or break existing behavior. (A new feature or
     improvement that DOES change/break behavior should be considered
     **Refactoring**).

* **Refactoring** - significant changes to the code that may impact
     backward compatibility.

All contributions, even **trivial** ones, should be submitted as pull
requests. Even if human review is not required, this ensures that
automated checks are performed, which can help catch and prevent common
errors (such as code style problems) prior to merging.

#### Targeting Pull Requests

VuFind® uses a system of [Git
branches](https://vufind.org/wiki/development:git-branches) to
manage releases. When creating a pull request, it should be targeted
against the appropriate branch.

**Trivial** and **Bug Fix** pull requests should usually target the most
recent release branch, so these fixes can be incorporated into the next
patch release. (An obvious exception to this rule is if the PR fixes a
problem that was introduced subsequent to the release).

**New Feature** pull requests should usually target the dev branch, for
inclusion in the next minor release.

**Refactoring** pull requests should usually target the dev branch,
unless a special dev-x.y branch has been set up to track the next major
release while a minor release is still under development.

#### Merging Rules

Any committer can merge a **trivial** contribution, even if it is their
own, as long as the Continuous Integration process has passed. All other
contributions require a review by one or more other community members.

Any contribution with an approved review by the Community Manager may be
merged immediately. For contributions that fall outside of the Community
Manager's areas of expertise, the Community Manager may delegate the
review to another individual with appropriate experience, and the
contribution can be merged after that individual's approval. It is the
responsibility of the Community Manager and his/her delegees not to
approve pull requests that may require more review and discussion prior
to merging.

Any contributions with approvals from one or more committers operate on
the principle of "lazy consensus" and may be merged if there are no
objections or suggested changes within 72 hours of the first approval.
This 72 hour waiting period may be overridden by a majority vote of the
PMC if there is an urgent need to merge a contribution more quickly. For
contributions that cannot reach "lazy consensus," the voting process
described above should be followed.

#### Communication and Monitoring

Committers and members of the PMC are strongly encouraged to follow the
project's GitHub organization so that they will receive notifications of
new pull requests and can contribute reviews as their time and expertise
permit. Contributors are also encouraged to send a message about their
contribution to the [VuFind®
Tech](https://sourceforge.net/projects/vufind/lists/vufind-tech)
mailing list if they do not receive a review in a timely fashion.

## Changes

December 12, 2022: Added ® symbol to VuFind® references; added paragraph
on Conflict of Interest policy and non-voting PMC guests.

## Acknowledgements

This document is based in large part on the OSS Watch \"[Template for a Meritocratic Governance Document](http://oss-watch.ac.uk/resources/meritocraticgovernancemodel##template-for-a-meritocratic-governance-document),\"
which was written by Ross Gardler and Gabriel Hanganu and licensed under
a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.
